---
template: BlogPost
path: /happier-than-ever-billie-eilish
date: 2021-07-29T20:00:00+00:00
title: Billie Eilish - Happier Than Ever
thumbnail: /assets/happierthanever.jpg
metaDescription: Happier Than Ever by Billie Eilish -- Album Review
---

<b>Billie Eilish follows up her stunning debut with a slightly inconsistent but solid project, further cementing her place as one of the most exciting and forward-thinking popstars in recent years. </b>
<br/><br/>

Billie Eilish is, simply put, one of the significant musicians of our generation. Quickly gaining attention after uploading her viral debut single "Ocean Eyes" to SoundCloud in 2015, she rose to pop stardom through a combination of endless media attention, good connections (especially her brother Finneas, a seasoned producer and writer who worked on every track on [i]Happier Than Ever[/i]), and pure talent. After instantly getting signed to a major label, Eilish released her first EP, [i]don't smile at me[/i], in 2017. However, her 2019 debut album, [i]WHEN WE ALL FALL ASLEEP, WHERE DO WE GO?[/i] cemented her as a superstar. Simultaneously one of the most critically acclaimed and popular records of the year, [i]WHEN WE ALL FALL ASLEEP...[/i] is a masterful showcase of Eilish's talents. Alternating between heartfelt ballads, sleek bangers, and more, Eilish's debut dexterously dabbles in dark, intense, and minimal electropop. The result is a centerpiece of the recent pop scene -- the album's stunning production, solid writing, and exceptional vocal performances and melodies instantly made Eilish an artist to look out for. She delivered a second full-length project in just two years with the sixteen-track [i]Happier Than Ever[/i], and while it doesn't consistently reach the impossibly high bar set by the debut, Eilish brings more diversity, introspection and creativity to her sophomore LP, smashing expectations and crafting an outstanding pop album.

"Getting Older" is a minimalist, open-heart opener, centered around Eilish's present. The song is an honest look into Eilish's stardom, emotions, and fading interest in music, and its backing track, a warm, synthy chord progression, stays subtle throughout the song's entire runtime, highlighting Eilish's writing and gorgeous vocal delivery. Such introspection and reflection is a common theme throughout [i]Happier Than Ever[/i]: songs like "my future", "Happier Than Ever", and interlude "Not My Responsibility" meditate on Eilish's perception, thoughts, and experiences heavily.

The album also has many similarly subdued tracks, including a collection of acoustic cuts interspersed throughout the tracklist. These moments are often where Eilish's writing and vocal prowess shine the most -- take "Your Power", an understated yet brutally written ballad centered on an abusive relationship with an ex-boyfriend, or "Halley's Comet", a confused, conflicted and infatuated love song written to an unnamed individual.

 The project also features a multitude of softer electronic cuts, like "Everybody Dies", a song marked by subdued chords, arpeggios, and subtle sub-bass hits, and "GOLDWING", an angelic and beautifully produced song that, despite its strengths, ultimately suffers from its lack of distinguishable structure. Although some of these mellower cuts feel a bit dry and unmemorable on first listen, Finneas handles them gracefully and gorgeously, the humble instrumentals accentuating Eilish's vocals and ultimately constructing some of the album's best material.

On the opposite end, however, this album also features many polished electropop cuts. For example, the second track, "I Didn't Change My Number", sports stuttering, "Hotline Bling"-reminiscent chords and a steady beat, and "OverHeated" has an IDM-reminiscent drum pattern layered over warm, ambient-esque synths. Some of the album even borders on avant-pop -- "NDA" features punchy drums, heavy autotune, and an atypical structure and atmosphere, and "Oxytocin" displays quasi-industrial, moderately abrasive stylings, especially in its outro. However, some of the more electronic songs play better than others -- the aforementioned "Oxytocin", despite having great production, doesn't mesh well with Eilish's vocal style, and the stuttering notes in the song's instrumental are a bit irritating, to say the least. Despite some inconsistencies, however, the electronic-leaning tracks on [i]Happier Than Ever[/i] are incredibly interesting and forward-thinking, especially among an increasingly stagnant set of contemporaries, and they highlight Eilish as one of the most exciting artists in her scene.

Although the vast majority of the songs on [i]Happier Than Ever[/i] fit into these two loose categories, describing the album as a melting pot of the two styles would be a tremendous disservice to the project for one reason: the penultimate title track. (Side note: I do believe this is one of the few songs that can legitimately be spoiled pre-listen, so please don't read this if you haven't listened to the album/song yet.)

"Happier Than Ever" opens like another of the many acoustic tracks on this album -- the first half of the song is lyrically and stylistically reminiscent of "Your Power", soft acoustic guitars and Eilish's light voice floating throughout the track's mix. However, about three minutes in, the song unexpectedly leaps head-first into a gloriously overbearing wall of roaring, distorted, and noisy guitars, Eilish's vocal performance rapidly gaining force for the remainder of the song. "Happier Than Ever" is composed well, produced well, and written well, but it doesn't get its power or memorability from any of these things -- instead, its strength is derived from the way that it completely and thoroughly upends everything we thought we knew about Billie Eilish. Throughout her entire discography, Eilish made herself out as an artist whose forte laid in quietness, consistently delivering her vocals in an understated tone with similarly muted instrumentals. Noise-pop seemed to be the furthest one could get from Eilish's style. However, with this track, Eilish flips any and all expectations on their heads, creating one of the most unexpected moments of any album in recent memory. Not only is the song surprising though, especially in its placement at the end of [i]Happier Than Ever[/i], it's just really damn good. The aforementioned explosion of noise is absolutely stunning, and Eilish manages to match the energy of the song, delivering one of the most forceful vocal performances of her career. "Happier Than Ever" is one of the most stunning and unexpected musical movements by any artist as big as Eilish in a long time, and it's a sight to behold.

Despite some rocky moments and occasional inconsistencies, [i]Happier Than Ever[/i] is an incredible follow-up by one of the most interesting artists in the pop scene today. While it doesn't hold the cohesion or lyrical power of much of her debut, her sophomore project brings higher highs, significantly more variation, and stunning production and composition, formulating a truly great project and further solidifying Eilish's position as one of the most promising new artists of our time.

*<h3> Rating: 8.6 </h3>*