---
template: BlogPost
path: /cavalcade-black-midi
date: 2021-05-26T20:00:00+00:00
title: black midi - Cavalcade
thumbnail: /assets/cavalcade.jpg
metaDescription: Cavalcade by black midi -- Album Review
---

<b>black midi are many things, but one thing they certainly are not is a traditional rock band, and if that wasn't made evident by the band's debut, it certainly has been now.</b>
<br/><br/>

black midi is a British rock outfit. Hailing from London, the band formed at the prestigious BRIT School, whose alumni include Adele, Amy Winehouse, Imogen Heap, and FKA twigs. Radicalized by vocalist and guitarist Geordie Greep's group-chat music recommendations, the band quickly gained credibility through performances at the legendary Windmill pub and live music venue, the beating heart of the music sphere that has nurtured bands like Black Country, New Road and Squid. Their debut single, "bmbmbm" (pronounced "boom-boom-boom"), features a repeated one-note riff and reverbed, hysterial screams contrasted against regularly spaced, short, high-intensity noise passages, as an overwrought Greep endlessly and sarcastically repeats the same three or four lines. It's explosive, raw, and bold, and the band's debut album, released on Rough Trade in 2019, manages to fit the same descriptors just as well. The band performs angular math-rock, Western-inspired guitar sections, epics about the Flint, Michigan water crisis, and more, and manages to pack it all into an exhilarating, head-spinning 43 minutes. They easily could have milked the same sound for at least a few more records, but the band wasn't content staying still. Their sophomore LP, *Cavalcade*, manages to transition the band's sound into a style that somehow manages to be more thrilling and far more dynamic than the band's debut, revealing a far more diverse and chaotic sound than on any of their previous music -- it's truly a sight to behold. 
<br/>

The album introduces itself with lead single "John L", easily one of my favorite songs of the year. The instrumental, centered around a truly weird and yet stupidly earwormy riff, transitions between rhythmic sections, driven by Morgan Simpson's flawless drumming, and quieter, even fully silent breaks, giving the more chaotic sections room to breathe. The lyrics, depicting a cult leader who falls out of favor with the people, who then violently overthrow him, read more like the writing paired with an avant-garde picture book than verses for music of any sort. The inconsistent rhyme schemes, somewhat-obscured symbolism, and the flipped version of Martin Luther King Jr.'s "I Have A Dream" speech create the weirdest lyrical landscape of any black midi track, and that's saying a lot. However, it still works perfectly with the inharmonious piano keysmashes, anxious strings, and jazz-fusion saxophones and trumpets that line the piece, and it makes for a gigantic and perfect opener to the album.
<br/>

"John L" is such a great opening number not only because it's one of black midi's best tracks but because it manages to perfectly embodies the whiplash-inducing dynamics of this album: case in point, the following song, "Marlene Dietrich". It's immediately a jarring right turn away from nearly all of the band's previous work -- Greep's quieter and more melodic vocals back an acoustic instrumental, and his vocal inflections paired with the track's atmospheric instrumental feels like it could have been pulled straight out of the twentieth century (which is not anything I thought I'd be saying about a black midi track). It serves as a great foil to the band's traditionally loud, volatile style, especially as the album transitions back into a more "traditional black midi" (whatever that means) jazz-rock sound. "Chondramalacia Patella" features similar melodic, slowed-down vocals to "Marlene", but its anxious and dynamic instrumental feels reminiscent of an avant-prog "953" with the chaotic outro breakdown of "bmbmbm", and "Slow" balances quiet, rhythmic drums, horns, and soft, jaded vocals with loud, slightly discordant, disorderly, distinctly black midi passages. 
<br/>

The following "Diamond Stuff" is easily one of the least recognizably black midi tracks -- for nearly two minutes, it features nothing but a plucked, haunting, desert-esque acoustic guitar, backed by nothing but small hits of reverberating, quiet synths. Roughly halfway through the song's runtime, Greep starts singing -- his quiet, deep voice sounds almost processed. The instrumental starts to build behind his vocals, atmospheric, calming drones and soft drum hits coalescing and gaining rhythm into one of the most beautiful moments on the entire project. 
<br/>

On the ensuing "Dethroned", atmospheric synths sit behind a saxophone in the song's intro before squeaky, short horns, drums, and Greep's vocals, somewhat buried in the mix, enter. The song features staccato instruments backing Greep's vocals, which play an almost haunted-mansion-like melody right before the track builds into its grand climax, roaring guitars, short drum hits, and strings complementing. The song transitions into one of black midi's shortest and most chaotic songs, "Hogwash and Balderdash". Heightened, yet somewhat soft, atmospheric plucked-guitar-and-string passages clash with anxious, inharmonious note hits, almost circus-sounding melodies, three-note riffs, and more, each of which don't stick around for more than a few seconds, creating one of the most anxious moments on the entire album, and one of my favorites. I just wish it was longer, honestly.
<br/>

However, black midi follows up one of their most intense and consise tracks with one of their longest and (relatively) most mellow, "Ascending Forth". The song is another acoustic guitar number -- Greep's vocals are more understated than on any other point on the LP as nothing but a plucked guitar backs his vocals. A bit into the song, drums and strings enter and Greep's singing gets very slightly more anxious and loses just a bit of tune, but the song returns to relative calm as Greep hits a gorgeous falsetto note. The track, although it never reaches the grandiose and anxious highs of some parts of the album, still manages to vary its own dynamics, building from hushed, plucked guitars to walls of jazzy horns, strings, and piano on its own volition throughout the song's nearly ten-minute runtime. Just like on "Marlene Dietrich", the vocal delivery on this piece sounds like it could have been taken straight out of the 1900s, but, on this song, it just has this soft black midi touch that elevates it to the next level. As the song ascends (pun intended) to its climax, with Greep's nearly-strained vocal delivery cutting through an incongruous and yet gorgeous instrumental, the album reaching its apex with a nearly-emotional string passage, I was left speechless, my head spinning, trying to comprehend the album I had just heard. 
<br/>

black midi truly have something special in this project. No album this year has left me as immediately stunned as this. The band manages to contrast and mesh an amalgamation of different sounds, and do it successfully, ending up with one of the most thrilling albums of the year so far. Although its transitions sometimes feel too jarring, *Cavalcade* is a masterclass in creativity, instrumentalism, and dynamics. Truly TBE. 

*<h3> Rating: 9.6 </h3>*

<iframe style="border: 0; width: 100%; height: 120px;" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/album=2744464804/size=large/bgcol=ffffff/linkcol=0687f5/tracklist=false/artwork=small/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="https://bmblackmidi.bandcamp.com/album/cavalcade">Cavalcade by black midi</a></iframe>