---
template: BlogPost
path: /ants-from-up-there-black-country-new-road
date: 2022-02-03T23:11:12-08:00
title: Black Country, New Road - Ants From Up There
thumbnail: /assets/afut.jpg
metaDescription: Ants From Up There by Black Country, New Road -- Album Review
---

<b>Black Country, New Road's opus. </b>
<br/><br/>

Black Country, New Road felt like a band that could never stop moving. Revealing themselves to the world with the cacophonous, anxious, and experimental duet of “Athen’s, France” and “Sunglasses”, BC,NR immediately rose to prominence among underground rock fans. Endlessly lauded by British music magazines, the band debuted to high fanfare with 2021’s _For the first time_, a compilation of fan-favorite live cuts, re-recorded singles, and new tracks that painted a bright future for the band’s unique, artsy, and anxious brand of post-rock. The group’s manic, experimental, often-introspective guitar music seemed to dictate the story of a young art-school Brit learning his way around the world through post-ironic references and over-sharing vulnerability, feeling like anything might explode beyond control at any moment. _Ants From Up There_ paints the story of the same individual, resigned to the struggles of relationships and aging and life, clinging onto hope as his self-referential universe crashes down around him. It’s subtle and massive; it’s abstract and intimate; it’s the kind of powerful that will send you into a half-conscious, pensive daze. It rips open the soul of its protagonist in music and in writing, and in doing so, it causes us to look into our own. Emotionally affecting, potent, and indescribably compelling. 

BC,NR felt like a band that would never be quiet. On their first two singles, they cycled through discordant explosions of noise and manic, emotional vocal performances from vocalist Issac Wood. Even the quietest moments of their debut, _For the first time_, felt like a band still learning the ropes of fragility--the minimalist and touching “Track X”, the album’s only consistently-understated cut, still felt underdeveloped, like the band was picking up the basics of their chamber-pop sound. The same is not true on _Ants From Up There_--just a year after the release of their debut, the band seems to have mastered the art of quiet. “Bread Song” is a gorgeous, lush chamber piece that centers itself around an acoustic riff that gains rhythm and swells but never enough to betray the song’s bittersweet, familiar flavor, like BC,NR’s instruments are surrounding you and playing for you. A similar intimacy permeates much of the album--“Mark’s Theme”, a short motif dedicated to saxophonist Lewis Evans’s uncle and exponent of the band who died of COVID in early 2021, has the composition of an interlude but an outsized emotional punch, supported by an ethereal saxophone line and the closeness of the recording. The track brings you close to the emotional turmoil of the group itself, and the band is able to inspire the same feelings of anxiety, longing, and despair through _AFUT_’s simplicity rather than through its maximalism.

BC,NR felt like an anti-pop band. In the age of two-minute hits and sterile hooks, the band seemed to oppose the musical status quo at every point possible--the multi-phased complexity of tracks like “Sunglasses” and the winding builds of songs like “Science Fair” and “Opus” opposed what felt like the music charts’ bonding to structure, choruses, and quick payoffs. The Spectator called the band “so far from the mainstream that they could catch a flight to it, and still need to rent a car for a six-hour drive at the other end”. However, while the band still retains their affinity for long tracks, complex compositions, and delay of gratification, they seem far more willing to delve into accessibility on _AFUT_, the band’s fondness of pop music shining through ever-so-slightly throughout the album. The album’s first single and first full-length track, “Chaos Space Marine”, gleefully stitches together piano-backed verses, catchy melodies, and an endless array of unique hooks and passages, all centered around one uncharacteristically melodic and carefree motif. It’s a track brimming with as many ideas as some of their longest songs but with conciseness and a catchy sound that would have been inconceivable from the band just a year ago. The same goes for tracks like “Concorde”, which adopts a verse--chorus--verse structure that could’ve been mistaken for the progression of a moderately ambitious Billboard Hot 100 single if not for the song’s instrumental, vocal, and lyrical components themselves. The Bob Dylan-inspired “The Place He Inserted The Blade”, a disarmingly beautiful progressive pop song, features a simultaneously energetic and delicate instrumental and anthemic background vocals backing Issac’s impassioned, infatuated vocal performance, creating one of the most tender and powerful moments on the album. The songs are a world away from the band’s previous works--BC,NR’s inspiration by Phoebe Bridgers and Arcade Fire is just as visible as their affinity for black midi and _Spiderland_ across _AFUT_.

None of this is to say that the band has abandoned their eccentricities, sinuous structuring, or subversive songwriting: BC,NR’s progressive creativity is in full force simultaneously with its admiration of Top 40 pop. “Concorde”, despite adopting a familiar structure, still introduces new instruments, ideas, and post-choruses, building on its original riff and melody until the song builds into a wall of simultaneous instruments that feels halfway between crushing melancholy and euphoria. “Haldern” cycles through fragile piano chords, soft guitars, and strings that quickly grow into formidable swells of instrumentation and deconstruct just as fast behind Issac’s quatrains, and “Good Will Hunting” subverts expectations of structure between subdued, extended instrumental bridges, riff modulations, and a massive final chorus. On songs like these, the band is able to balance structure with amorphism, striking a balance between the unpredictability of much of their previous work and the immediate accessibility that it largely lacked.

However, none of the album’s previous emotional potency or power compares to the project’s last two cuts, the sum of which amounts to one of the most powerful musical one-two-punches I’ve ever heard. The penultimate “Snow Globes”, a nine-minute behemoth built around one continuous riff rather than multiple phrases, takes its time to build, introducing a strikingly beautiful riff that grows throughout the entire track, introducing strings, backing vocals, saxophone, and Issac’s emotional narration. The song, however, becomes swallowed by colossal, improvised, expressive, frenzied drums, and at the track’s climax, it feels like Issac is buried under the percussion, screaming for the slightest bit of control as his universe collapses, and by the time the drums exit, only the original instrumental riff playing, Issac sounds broken down, like he’s at the end of it all and can muster nothing but a despondent acceptance of how little he can control and how much he could control. 

“Basketball Shoes”, the album’s twelve-minute, three-part closing number, is a magnum opus of sorts for the band--the kind of song that can never be recreated, the kind that you wish you could listen to again for the first time. Like the preceding “Snow Globes”, three minutes of build-up precede Issac’s first vocals, the song’s first act growing into its own before he enters. His singing is presented with an emotional but newly clear air, almost like he’s trying his best to fight back his own tears. His references to past _AFUT_ lyrical motifs feel dejected, as does the instrumental surrounding him, and the song silences before expanding into a transitionary passage. In the song’s noticeably more energetic second act, Issac’s verse expands into a mini-climax that surrounds the verse’s riff before silencing again, soft instrumental interplay expanding into a massive, slow-moving but powerful wall of roaring electric guitars and anxious harmonization that leads into the song’s third part. Much like “Snow Globes”, the song’s finale is built around lyrical repetition. Issac’s singing packs in every last bit of emotion, imbuing infinite meaning into the words while leaving their meaning ambiguous. The song’s final climax is indescribably huge, every instrument in the album playing at full drive and then some. Like “Concorde”, the passage evokes the same balance between melancholy and euphoria, between resolution and devolution, between clarity and confusion, but at another level of power. Backing vocals, descending strings, piano octaves, and guitars inflate until they blend into one, barely distinguishable from one another, as Issac’s impassioned screams drown under the song’s instrumental. It’s an ineffably powerful piece of music that covers the entire gamut of emotions, a twelve-minute song that couldn’t have been one second shorter, an opus for the band and for today’s scene of post-rock. 

Despite a new set of influences, dynamics, and structures that likely disqualify BC,NR from the title of World’s Second Best Slint Tribute Act, this album still is reminiscent of _Spiderland_--if not as much in its constant sense of foreboding and instrumental suspense, then in its silence, in its yearning, in its deeply moving emotional vulnerability, in the fact that, after the album outros and fades to silence, something feels like it’s shifted within you. With Issac’s recently announced departure from the band, _Ants From Up There_ is a worthy swan song for Issac, the band’s masterpiece, and a turning point for the band’s underground scene and for rock music as a whole. A modern classic.

*<h3> Rating: 9.7 </h3>*

<iframe style="border: 0; width: 100%; height: 120px;" src="https://bandcamp.com/EmbeddedPlayer/album=3296358317/size=large/bgcol=ffffff/linkcol=0687f5/tracklist=false/artwork=small/transparent=true/" seamless><a href="https://blackcountrynewroad.bandcamp.com/album/ants-from-up-there">Ants From Up There by Black Country, New Road</a></iframe>